[MUSIC]
>> Kyle Simpson: All right.
So that's it for
our survey of HTML 5 technologies
the next thing that we're going to do is
start to get our hands
a little bit dirty with node.
Well we're going to move
into some code there but
I wanted to take just a few more minutes
to kind of the last of my lecturing
if you will for
the day before we get into our code.
I want to just kind of talk to
you about where node really sits
in the whole scheme of things that
we're dealing with technology wise.
This is firmly in the realm of Kyle's
own personal opinions and my own take.
I in no way shape or form do I
represent any official stance and
moreover I'm not even very liked
in the node standards community so
they probably would disagree with me.
I'm just sharing with you my
own personal opinions and
where I see nodes fitting in
not only now but in the future.
Because there is a tendency and
I'm one of those people that would have
this tendency cuz if you can't tell.
I like JavaScript a lot.
There's a tendency to think
that Atwood's Law which says
anything that can be written in JavaScript
will be written in JavaScript does
that that means we should just
JavaScript all the things.
We should write everything in
JavaScript throw away all the Python,
all the Ruby, all the .NET everything
that's ever been written and anything but
JavaScript throw it away and
rewrite it in JavaScript.
That would be super exciting to me but
it also would be a really
terrible shitty world.
Cuz JavaScript is not right for
everything.
There's a whole bunch of stuff
that JavaScript is right for
that we haven't tapped its potential yet,
it's a bright future.
I say always bet on JavaScript.
So I see a bright future and
it's only getting brighter for JavaScript.
But that doesn't mean that
everything should be written.
I heard I don't even know who it
was that I heard it say this but
I was at a recent conference that I was
at, one of the panelists said, you know
[COUGH] theoretically you could write
code for my pacemaker in JavaScript but
I don't want you to stick
JavaScript in my heart right?
So think about it in that respect
I probably agree with you.
I don't want JavaScript running
my medical devices probably.
So just because you could do it in
JavaScript doesn't mean you shouldn't that
adage goes for a lot of things.
And so
just because node.js makes it possible for
you to write everything that you could
conceive of in JavaScript on the server or
in robots or light bulbs or
wherever else it's been embedded,
just because you could doesn't mean
that that's what node is really for?
It doesn't mean that that's
where node sweet spot is.
So, if it's not zero and it's not
infinity, where is the middle ground?
What does node do well?
The first thing and this is the reason
why we're spending most of our time today
thinking about it from the perspective
of communication technology.
It's really super
efficient at communication.
It's really really good at doing
highly efficient communication.
So this concept of web sockets
when we talk about signalling for
peer to peer you'll see the same
kind of concept it's really
really good at low latency high
throughput communications.
Not so good at static serving
of gigantic big files.
I probably wouldn't write a CDN server
that serves up giant video files
based upon node.
It's not so good at that.
It's not that it can't do that, but that's
just not its most efficient sweet spot.
It's really good at lots and lots of tiny
things happening all at the same time and
taking advantage of the event loop and
things like that.
So,
>> Kyle Simpson: [COUGH] Communications is
a great sweet spot, any time you're going
to think anything at all about web sockets
or any of the kind of highly efficient
communication that's necessary.
Nodes should pop to the top of your head
because it's going to be every bit as
efficient.
It really runs very comparably to the most
highly optimized systems on engineX and
other things like that.
It really can.
And in some cases out perform them.
They've been cases where people have
been able to show that it outperforms
natively compiled C code and that's
kind of a shocking thing to consider
compiled JavaScript program out performing
up optimized C but it's possible.
So there are some really good things that
JavaScript on node.Js could do for us.
But a couple of years ago when node
was kind of first coming out and
in fact literally while
node was being invented.
I was wrestling with
this concept of how does
JavaScript on the server fit into
the jobs that I was working at.
Remember I've been in this industry, have
worked in lots of jobs I only recently in
the last couple of years became a teacher.
So I got 13 years of
working in all the crappy,
corporate jobs that all of you work in.
And I know what it's like when you get
really excited about something but
the reality is that it doesn't
fit with where you're working.
And I had this frustration over and
over and over again,
where I wanted to use JavaScript
to do some task on the server.
I thought it makes a lot of sense that
I could write it better in JavaScript
anyway, so let me do it in JavaScript.
But back then we had no node and so
the only option was install
the Java stack and use Rhino.
Or something like that, which I don't love
Java so I didn't want to do that, and so
I was exploring this idea, what does it
mean to use JavaScript on the server?
How does that fit in with
the overall web stack?
And what I'm gonna do is to share with you
some ideas that I've had them out there
for a while, I read a whole
bunch of blog posts about this.
If you're interested more in this topic,
you can go to middleend.com.
And it redirects to a bunch of blog
posts that I've written over the last
several years about this topic.
But I started thinking about a different
way of approaching architecture that might
leverage JavaScript on the server.
And remember this predates node so I'm not
even really talking about node pursuit per
se I'm talking about
JavaScript on the server.
I started thinking, if I'm at a company
that already has 20,000 lines of PHP code,
or Java, or .NET or whatever,
if I got really excited and
I went to some conference or
I went to a workshop like you are here.
And I got really excited about JavaScript
on the server and I saw node, and
I was like, my God, I gotta do this,
and I go back to my company.
And on Monday morning I
walk into the standup and
in front of my boss I say to everybody
here's my thought we need to throw away
all 20,000 lines of our code base and
rewrite everything in JavaScript.
What is the likely reaction going
to be for my team just in general?
If it's not all ready in JavaScript the
likely reaction is GTFO not interested.
We're not, It's not practical.
Even if that's exciting,
it's not practical.
And many times there's
a strong gut roll reaction.
No, I definitely don't want
to rewrite it in JavaScript.
Your server side dot net
guys are not interested.
All right.
So, where does that leave me?
If I'm excited about JavaScript but
it's not practical for us to go and
write our application in JavaScript and
we don't have the ability to
do greenfield development from scratch,
then where does that leave me, am I stuck?
Do I have no options in
terms of JavaScript?
So what I just want to share with you of
the next few minutes is my take on where
server side JavaScript fits in to
the overall scheme of things in the real
world.
Okay, we have to set aside the cool fun
stuff like the stuff that we're gonna
explore today.
Set that kind of stuff aside.
When you go back on Monday morning and
you try to think about,
how could I use JavaScript at my job?
If it's not a reality that you're gonna
rewrite everything Is there any chance?
And then these are my thoughts.
So I started thinking I was at this job,
it was a PHP stack.
And I started thinking [COUGH] what would
it take for me to convince my team,
not that we need to rewrite
the entire application in JavaScript,
but there was one particular pain
point that I really really hated.
And it was the Smarty templating engine.
Because we're using PHP.
I don't know if anybody had any experience
with this, was many, many years back but
we were using Smarty and I really,
really hated some things about Smarty.
Didn't like how it was working and
so I was trying to convince them or
trying to come up with
a way to convince my boss.
And my team that we should stop doing
the templating part of our presentation
layer using PHP and using Smarty.
And I thought we could write a really cool
simple templating engine in JavaScript.
This predates a lot of the current
JavaScript templating engines but
I thought we could build
a templating engine in JavaScript.
And if we could run that JavaScript on the
server we can do exactly what we do now
where we present things and it didn't
even need to be a single page app.
It could still be server driven app but
we could let JavaScript run
that presentation layer.
And so I started playing around in my mind
with what that architecture would look
like and PHP is as many of you know it
is a per request synchronous model.
When you make a request to the server
it spins up a thread with Apache and
PHP in it.
PHP runs the completion, it sends out
a response and it shuts itself down.
There's no you know persistent memory
mothership thing like there is in Java
where it can manage stuff in memory.
It's just, it's a per request sort
of thing and I thought, well,
then I probably need a Java Script
engine that can be spun up per request.
So when PHP comes in and
sort of the CGI model, I could spin up
the Java Script engine, run some code
to generate a template, shutdown
the Java Script engine and take the string
and ship it back out to the browser.
So I started exploring.
What would that look like?
And a little known fact at the same time
that Ryan Dahl was inventing the really
awesome no JS.
I was writing a server side JavaScript
engine called byte chain to do
exactly that task.
Could I spin it up on a per request basis
run some of my server code in JavaScript
and then hand back control over to PHP,
or .NET Java or whatever.
This actually spanned over
a couple of jobs that I worked
on this idea because then
I went to a .NET shop.
And then I went to a Grail shop and
I saw everything under the sun and
every one of them the same pain points
were there were these things that I wanted
to have control over in doing JavaScript.
And I could not do them in
JavaScript because it wasn't
an acceptable architecture pattern.
And so, I came up with this
idea of the middle end,
I called it CBC client view
controller architecture.
And this idea of the middle end is that,
I observed that in every one of
those disparate stacks that we talk about
whether it's .Net or Java or whatever.
There's a certain core set of
tasks that always happens.
And most of the time these core tasks are
things that a front end developer needs to
be aware of.
And needs to have control over but equally
likely those tasks are deeply embedded
inside the guts of
the back end of their app.
Things like templating,
things like routing of URL's,
formatting your data,
validating your data.
How many of you have written
validation rules two, three, four,
five times inside of different
parts of your stack?
You know exactly what I'm
talking about just five right.
No big deal just five.
Because we have to write it once
in JavaScript on the front end
because we wanna be responsively
reacting to the user.
And then we of course we can't
trust what comes to the browser so
we write it again in
our application layer.
And then the database guys flip us off and
say well I don't even trust
the application layer so I'm gonna rewrite
it in a stored procedure Inside of
the database and then who knows what else?
I mean there's all these multiple layers
of people that feel like they need to do
the task of data validation cuz
I can't trust the other guy.
So there's a maximum computer science for
this that says
anytime there's more than one copy of
something one copy is always wrong.
So the more times we repeat our
data validation code the more chances
there are that something's out of sync,
something's not right and that's
a source of untold amounts of problems.
The same kinds of problems could
be identified with templating,
with URL writing, with data formatting,
internationalization, all these things.
These are things that I
call middle end tasks.
And they're usually embedded deeply within
your back end and that means that your
front end developers who are the ones that
need to care the most about those things.
We're are the ones that care the most
about how information gets transferred
back and forth through JSON.
We're the ones that care the most
about how things can be templated and
presented in the front end.
The backend guys don't care about that
stuff that's why they write servlets to
handle it cuz they're not interested in
markup but we are, as front end people.
We're interested in that stuff and
yet this unfortunate paradox is that
the stuff that we're most interested in
is the stuff that's furthest away and
most abstracted away from us in the stack.
And I think, that's an architectural
problem that we need to solve.
So the ideas of middle
ender coud we surface,
these middle end tasks
into a middle end tier.
These things like data validation and
routing and templating and so forth,
could we put them in a middle end tier?
And then I went so far as to say what if
we implemented the middle end tier using
server side JavaScript?
So I'm not talking about
rewriting your entire app.
In fact 90% of your app
we wouldn't even touch.
I'm only talking about this
small 10% of your backend,
that your backend doesn't even really
wanna do anyway and it's not very good at.
Just having it stop doing stuff like
templating and data validation and
put those things into the middle end.
And when we implement them in JavaScript,
we get this huge win because now we write
code that literally the same line of code
can run both on the server and
in the browser.
So we finally get to that euphoria of I
can write my data validation rule once and
only once and
use the exact same code in both places.
So these were these ideas about middle
end using server side JavaScript and
it predates the concept of node.JS.
Now, I've long since abandoned Bikechain
because clearly, Node.js won and
it gave us a really awesome server
side JavaScript environment.
But Node.js is not the only thing that's
ever been done in server side JavaScript,
and it's not the end answer.
There will be other server
side JavaScript things.
So I'm really talking bigger than Node
here to say that it happens to be a really
great option right now for
running your JavaScript.
And I would suggest to you if you're going
back to your jobs on Monday morning and
you're wondering to yourself,
how could I ever convince my boss to
let me do server side JavaScript?
One way to do that is to tell him
to flip him a big middle finger and
say I want to rewrite
our entire code base and
then you're probably going
to be looking for a new job.
Another perhaps more likely
scenario is you go to him and
say hey I've got this crazy idea,
what if you let me rewrite all of our
data validation rules in a Node.js and
little tiny middle end tier and
all I do is the data validation rules.
That's it I'm gonna rewrite
them in JavaScript.
We'll take them out of the database take
them out of the application layer take
them out of the crappy JavaScript and
jQuery that we've already written.
And we'll write them once in a properly
designed way we'll audit the rules to make
sure that they're valid and
they're sane and that they're solid.
And then we'll run it
inside in Node.js and
we'll use the exact same code inside of
the browser and now we have one location.
A source of authority for
our data validation rules.
That to me seems like a somewhat
more plausible conversation to
have with a team.
I don't know.
You may work at a job where they'd still
laugh at you but it seems like a little
bit more plausible of a way to go about
it and see you do that you prove it.
You say let me prove it.
Let's try it for
six months and see if it works.
And then once you've proven that, then
you can come back to him and say, okay,
why don't we talk about data formatting
and our internationalization rules?
How about we put that in the middle end?
And then how about we take all that
templating crap that you've been doing and
we put that in the middle end?
And then how about we talk about URL
routing and we put that in the middle end?
And pretty soon, you have a nice
well formed architecture where
the front-end and the back-end don't
have to worry about each other.
Because the buffer zone, the middle end is
where all of that important stuff happens.
Your front end developers that know
JavaScript can do everything they need
to do with the middle end tasks
in their native language.
And we get the benefits
of dry reusable coding.
That is what I see the future of
Node.js and server side JavaScript.
That I think is a much
more plausible story for
how JavaScript continues to take over.
Rather than the exception cases
like when Netflix comes out and
says, we're rewriting our entire app and
node.
And, everybody cheers and
says that's awesome.
There were for every one of those there's
a 100,000 companies that say, hell no.
We're not rewriting our app.
Those people still can benefit
from server side JavaScript.
Your company can benefit
It can benefit from Node, and
I think one of the ways it might do
that is this middle end task concept.
So that's it for my lecture on middle end.
Let's actually jump into some
code if you're interested at all
in any more of those ideas or
reading about it or
talking more about it again you
might check out middleend.com.